Bardet-Biedl syndrome
Other Names: BBS
https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/diseases/6866/bardet-biedl-syndrome

Summary
A rare genetic multisystem disorder characterized by the variable association of retinal dystrophy, obesity, polydactyly, genitourinary and kidney anomalies, learning disability and hypogonadism, with a wide spectrum of other minor manifestations.
Resource(s) for Medical Professionals and Scientists on This Disease:
RARe-SOURCE™ (https://raresource.nih.gov/diseases/filter/0006866) offers rare disease gene variant annotations and links to rare disease gene literature.

About Bardet-Biedl syndrome
Many rare diseases have limited information. Currently, GARD aims to provide the following information for this disease:

Population Estimate: Fewer than 5,000 people in the U.S. have this disease.
Symptoms: May start to appear at a variety of ages.
Cause: GARD does not currently have information about the cause of this disease.
Organizations: Patient organizations are available to help find a specialist, or advocacy and support for this specific disease.
Categories: Birth defects  Urinary and Reproductive diseases  Neurological diseases  Kidney diseases  Endocrine diseases  Gastrointestinal diseases

Causes
GARD does not currently have information about the cause of this disease.

Can This Disease Be Passed Down From Parent to Child?
Yes. It is possible for a biological parent to pass down genetic mutations that cause or increase the chances of getting this disease to their child. This is known as inheritance. Knowing whether other family members have previously had this disease, also known as family health history, can be very important information for your medical team. This tool from the Surgeon General can help you collect your family health history.

There are multiple ways, or patterns, a disease can be inherited depending on the gene(s) involved. Based on GARD's current data, this disease can be inherited in the following pattern(s):

Autosomal Recessive
Autosomal means the gene involved is located on one of the numbered chromosomes. Recessive means that a child must inherit two copies of the mutated gene, one from each biological parent, to be affected by the disease. A carrier is a person who only has one copy of the genetic mutation. A carrier usually doesn't show any symptoms of the disease.

If both biological parents are carriers, there is a 25% their child inherits both copies of the mutated gene and is affected by the disease. Additionally, there is a 50% chance their child inherits only one copy of the mutated gene and is a carrier.

Learn more about inheritance patterns from the National Library of Medicine (NLM) (https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/understanding/inheritance/inheritancepatterns/).


When Do Symptoms of Bardet-Biedl syndrome Begin?
Symptoms of this disease may start to appear at a variety of ages.

The age symptoms may begin to appear differs between diseases. Symptoms may begin in a single age range, or during several age ranges. The symptoms of some diseases may begin at any age. Knowing when symptoms may have appeared can help medical providers find the correct diagnosis.

Symptoms
The types of symptoms experienced, and their intensity, may vary among people with this disease. Your experience may be different from others. Consult your health care team for more information.

The following describes the symptom(s) associated with this disease along with the corresponding body system(s), description, synonyms, and frequency (Note: Not all possible symptoms may be listed):

Medical Term: Abnormal electroretinogram
Description: Any abnormality of the electrical responses of various cell types in the retina as measured by electroretinography.
Synonyms: Abnormal electroretinography; Abnormal ERG; ERG abnormal
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Cryptorchidism
Description: Testis in inguinal canal. That is, absence of one or both testes from the scrotum owing to failure of the testis or testes to descend through the inguinal canal to the scrotum.
Synonyms: Cryptorchism; Undescended testes; Undescended testis
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Downslanted palpebral fissures
Description: The palpebral fissure inclination is more than two standard deviations below the mean.
Synonyms: Antimongoloid eye slant; Antimongoloid slant of palpebral fissures; Antimongoloid slanted palpebral fissures; Down slanting palpebral fissures; Down-slanted palpebral fissures; Down-slanting palpebral fissure; Down-slanting palpebral fissures; Downslanting palpebral fissure; Downslanting palpebral fissures; Downward slanted palpebral fissures; Downward slanting of the opening between the eyelids; Downward slanting palpebral fissures; Downward-slanting palpebral fissures; Palpebral fissures down-slanted
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Finger syndactyly
Description: Webbing or fusion of the fingers, involving soft parts only or including bone structure. Bony fusions are referred to as "bony" Syndactyly if the fusion occurs in a radio-ulnar axis. Fusions of bones of the fingers in a proximo-distal axis are referred to as "Symphalangism".
Synonyms: Partial syndactyly
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Generalized hirsutism
Description: Abnormally increased hair growth over much of the entire body.
Synonyms: Excessive hairiness over body
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Hearing impairment
Description: A decreased magnitude of the sensory perception of sound.
Synonyms: Deafness; Hearing defect; Hearing impairment; Hypacusis
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Hepatic fibrosis
Description: The presence of excessive fibrous connective tissue in the liver. Fibrosis is a reparative or reactive process.
Synonyms: Liver fibrosis
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Hypertension
Description: The presence of chronic increased pressure in the systemic arterial system.
Synonyms: Arterial hypertension; Systemic hypertension
Frequency: Frequent

Medical Term: Hypogonadism
Description: A decreased functionality of the gonad.
Synonyms: Decreased activity of gonads
Frequency: Frequent

Medical Term: Hypoplasia of penis
Synonyms: Underdeveloped penis
Frequency: Frequent

Medical Term: Hypoplasia of the ovary
Description: Developmental hypoplasia of the ovary.
Synonyms: Underdeveloped ovary
Frequency: Frequent

Medical Term: Intellectual disability
Description: Subnormal intellectual functioning which originates during the developmental period. Intellectual disability, previously referred to as mental retardation, has been defined as an IQ score below 70.
Synonyms: Intellectual disability; Mental deficiency; Mental retardation; Mental retardation, nonspecific; Mental-retardation; Nonprogressive intellectual disability; Nonprogressive mental retardation
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears
Description: Ears that are low-set and posteriorly rotated.
Synonyms: Low-set posteriorly rotated ears
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Medial flaring of the eyebrow
Description: An abnormal distribution of eyebrow hair growth in the medial direction.
Synonyms: Medially flared eyebrows
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Multicystic kidney dysplasia
Description: Multicystic dysplasia of the kidney is characterized by multiple cysts of varying size in the kidney and the absence of a normal pelvicaliceal system. The condition is associated with ureteral or ureteropelvic atresia, and the affected kidney is nonfunctional.
Synonyms: Multicystic dysplastic kidney; Multicystic kidneys; Multicystic renal dysplasia
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Nephrotic syndrome
Description: Nephrotic syndrome is a collection of findings resulting from glomerular dysfunction with an increase in glomerular capillary wall permeability associated with pronounced proteinuria. Nephrotic syndrome refers to the constellation of clinical findings that result from severe renal loss of protein, with Proteinuria and hypoalbuminemia, edema, and hyperlipidemia.
Synonyms: Nephrosis
Frequency: Occasional

Neurological speech impairment
Synonyms: Speech disorder; Speech impairment; Speech impediment
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Nystagmus
Description: Rhythmic, involuntary oscillations of one or both eyes related to abnormality in fixation, conjugate gaze, or vestibular mechanisms.
Synonyms: Involuntary, rapid, rhythmic eye movements
Frequency: Frequent

Medical Term: Obesity
Description: Accumulation of substantial excess body fat.
Synonyms: Having too much body fat; Obesity
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Pigmentary retinopathy
Description: An abnormality of the retina characterized by pigment deposition. It is typically associated with migration and proliferation of macrophages or retinal pigment epithelial cells into the retina; melanin from these cells causes the pigmentary changes. Pigmentary retinopathy is a common final pathway of many retinal conditions and is often associated with visual loss.
Synonyms: Pigmentary retinal deposits; Retinal pigment clumping; Retinal pigmentary clumping; Retinal pigmentary degeneration
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Postaxial hand polydactyly
Description: Supernumerary digits located at the ulnar side of the hand (that is, on the side with the fifth finger).
Synonyms: Extra little finger; Extra pinkie finger; Extra pinky finger; Polydactyly affecting the 5th finger; Postaxial polydactyly of fingers; Postaxial polydactyly of hand; Postaxial polydactyly of hands
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Prominent nasal bridge
Description: Anterior positioning of the nasal root in comparison to the usual positioning for age.
Synonyms: Elevated nasal bridge; High nasal bridge; Prominent bridge of nose; Prominent nasal bridge; Prominent nasal root; Protruding bridge of nose; Protruding nasal bridge
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Short neck
Description: Diminished length of the neck.
Synonyms: Cervical shortening; Decreased cervical height; Decreased cervical length; Decreased length of neck; Short neck
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Short stature
Description: A height below that which is expected according to age and gender norms. Although there is no universally accepted definition of short stature, many refer to "short stature" as height more than 2 standard deviations below the mean for age and gender (or below the 3rd percentile for age and gender dependent norms).
Synonyms: Decreased body height; Height less than 3rd percentile; Short stature; Small stature; Stature below 3rd percentile
Frequency: Frequent

Medical Term: Skeletal muscle atrophy
Description: The presence of skeletal muscular atrophy (which is also known as amyotrophy).
Synonyms: Amyotrophy; Amyotrophy involving the extremities; Muscle atrophy; Muscle atrophy, neurogenic; Muscle degeneration; Muscle hypotrophy; Muscle wasting; Muscular atrophy; Neurogenic muscle atrophy; Neurogenic muscle atrophy, especially in the lower limbs; Neurogenic muscular atrophy
Frequency: Occasional


Diagnostic Journey
On average, it takes more than six years to receive an accurate rare disease diagnosis. Many primary care providers (PCPs) may not be familiar with rare diseases, and you may need to see multiple specialists to reach the correct diagnosis. However, advocating for yourself with your healthcare team may help speed your time to diagnosis. To combat common challenges, be prepared:
Find disease-specific information to discuss with your healthcare providers.
Ask for diagnostic tests.
Request referrals to specialists.
Knowing where to start your diagnostic journey and how to navigate the next steps are critical to speeding your time to diagnosis.

Your Diagnostic Team
How can a diagnostic team help?
Establishing care with a dedicated primary care provider (PCP) is an important early step in your rare disease journey. A PCP can help improve care and shorten the time to diagnosis by providing referrals to the appropriate specialists. These specialists, with advanced training in different body systems or types of diseases, can offer the specialized diagnostic procedures you need.

Use this tool (https://www.medicare.gov/care-compare/?providerType=Physician) by Medicare to find a PCP in your area by inputting your location and keyword "Primary Care Provider."

A PCP that specializes in the care of children is called a pediatrician. Use this tool (https://www.healthychildren.org/English/tips-tools/find-pediatrician/Pages/Pediatrician-Referral-Service.aspx)  by the American Academy of Pediatrics to find a pediatrician in your area  by inputting your location.

Diagnostic teams for Bardet-Biedl syndrome may include:

Endocrinology
Endocrinology specialists focus on diagnosing, treating, and managing diseases related to hormones. Endocrinologists diagnose conditions related to growth, development, thyroid function, and more. Endocrinologists may order blood testing and hormone panels to diagnose diseases.

You may be able to find an endocrinologist  in your area (directory by the Endocrine Society) (https://www.endocrine.org/patient-engagement/find-an-endocrinologist-directory).

Gastroenterology
Gastroenterology specialists focus on diagnosing, treating, and managing diseases that affect the digestive system. Specialists in this field are know as gastrointestinal (GI) specialists or gastroenterologists. These specialists commonly use imaging studies and use cameras to examine the inside of the digestive tract to diagnose digestive diseases.

You may be able to find a gastroenterologist  in your area (directory by the American College of Gastroenterology) (https://gi.org/patients/find-a-gastroenterologist/).

Nephrology
Nephrology specialists focus on diagnosing, treating, and managing diseases that affect the kidneys. Nephrologists may order blood tests, urine tests, and imaging studies to diagnose diseases of the kidneys.

You may be able to find a nephrologist in your area by inputting your location and keyword "Nephrology" (directory by Medicare) (https://www.medicare.gov/care-compare/?providerType=Physician).

Neurology
Neurology specialists focus on diagnosing, treating, and managing diseases that affect the nervous system, including the brain, spinal cord, and nerves. Neurologists often use imaging studies, physical examination, or cognitive assessments to diagnose neurological diseases.

You may be able to find a neurologist in your area by inputting your location and keyword "Neurology" (directory by Medicare) (https://www.medicare.gov/care-compare/?providerType=Physician).

Obstetrics/Gynecology
Obstetrics and gynecology specialists focus on diagnosing, treating, and managing diseases that affect the female reproductive system as well as pregnancy and birth. Obstetrician/Gynecologists, or Ob-Gyns, commonly order tests to monitor pregnancies, and to help with the early detection, prevention, and management of conditions that affect the female reproductive system. Ob-Gyns may use imaging studies or blood or urine testing to diagnose gynecological diseases.

You may be able to find an obstetrician/gynecologist  in your area (directory by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists) (https://www.acog.org/womens-health/find-an-ob-gyn).

Ophthalmology
Ophthalmology specialists focus on diagnosing, treating, and managing diseases that affect the eyes. Ophthalmologists may perform examinations and order tests or imaging studies to aid in diagnosis.

You may be able to find an ophthalmologist  in your area (directory by the American Academy of Ophthalmology) (https://secure.aao.org/aao/find-ophthalmologist).

Urology
Urology specialists focus on diagnosing, treating, and managing diseases affecting the urinary tract for all sexes. Urologists also manage conditions affecting the male reproductive system. Urologists may use imaging studies or blood or urine testing to diagnose reproductive and urogenital diseases.

You may be able to find a urologist in your area by inputting your location and keyword "Urology" (directory by Medicare) (https://www.medicare.gov/care-compare/?providerType=Physician).

Multidisciplinary Care Centers
Is it time to find a multidisciplinary care center?
If you've visited your PCP, met with specialists, and undergone the recommended tests, but still do not have a confirmed diagnosis, it may be time to visit a multidisciplinary care center. Multidisciplinary care centers are usually teaching, university, or research hospitals that have teams of medical experts and specialists working together in the same location. This means a wide range of diagnostic tests and clinical knowledge are available at one facility, which can help increase communication and collaboration among your care team. The additional resources often available at multidisciplinary centers may help speed the time to diagnosis for rare diseases.
Find a multidisciplinary care center in your area (https://www.medicare.gov/care-compare/?providerType=Hospital).

Rare Disease Experts
How can you find a rare disease expert?
If a diagnosis remains unknown despite extensive efforts by your PCP and specialists, it can be challenging to know what kind of expert you may need or where to find one. A rare disease expert is a care provider that has knowledge or training on specific disease(s), but there may only be a few experts in your state, region, or country. Rare disease experts may work at large research or teaching hospitals. In complex cases, coordinating with a network of experts can help your care provider find the right diagnosis. 
Contact a GARD Information Specialist for help finding an expert (https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/contact).

You can ask your care providers for help finding an expert or use directory tools to search for experts near you. The following organization(s) may maintain a list of experts or expert centers for people living with Bardet-Biedl syndrome:
Foundation Fighting Blindness (https://www.fightingblindness.org/retinal-specialists)

Find Your Community
How Can Patient Organizations Help?
Patient organizations can help patients and families connect. They build public awareness of the disease and are a driving force behind research to improve patients' lives. They may offer online and in-person resources to help people live well with their disease. Many collaborate with medical experts and researchers.

Services of patient organizations differ, but may include:
Ways to connect to others and share personal stories
Easy-to-read information
Up-to-date treatment and research information
Patient registries
Lists of specialists or specialty centers
Financial aid and travel resources

Please note: GARD provides organizations for informational purposes only and not as an endorsement of their services. Please contact an organization directly if you have questions about the information or resources it provides.

View GARD's criteria for including patient organizations, which can be found under the FAQs on our About page (https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/about). Request an update or to have your organization added to GARD (https://contact.rarediseases.info.nih.gov/Gard/s/patient-organization?language=en_US).

Patient Organizations

Organization Name: Bardet-Biedl Syndrome Foundation & Family Association (https://www.bardetbiedl.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Bardet-Biedl syndrome
Country: United States

Organization Name: Bardet-Biedl Syndrome UK (https://bbsuk.org.uk/)
Who They Serve: People With Bardet-Biedl syndrome
Country: United Kingdom

Organization Name: Foundation Fighting Blindness (https://www.fightingblindness.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Bardet-Biedl syndrome
Helpful Link: List of Experts (https://www.fightingblindness.org/retinal-specialists)
Helpful Link: Research Registry (https://www.fightingblindness.org/my-retina-tracker-registry)
Country: United States

Organization Name: National Kidney Foundation (https://www.kidney.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Kidney diseases
Helpful Link: Research Registry (https://www.kidney.org/nkfpatientnetwork)
Country: United States

Organization Name: Renal Support Network (https://www.rsnhope.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Kidney diseases
Country: United States

Organization Name: EveryLife Foundation for Rare Diseases (https://everylifefoundation.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Rare Diseases
Country: United States

Organization Name: Genetic Alliance (http://www.geneticalliance.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Rare Diseases
Country: United States

Organization Name: Global Genes (http://globalgenes.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Rare Diseases
Country: United States

Organization Name: National Organization for Rare Disorders (https://rarediseases.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Rare Diseases
Country: United States


Participate in Research
Clinical studies are part of clinical research and play an important role in medical advances, including for rare diseases. Through clinical studies, researchers may ultimately uncover better ways to treat, prevent, diagnose, and understand human diseases.

What Are Clinical Studies?
Clinical studies are medical research involving people as participants. There are two main types of clinical studies:
Clinical trials determine if a new test or treatment for a disease is effective and safe by comparing groups receiving different tests/treatments.
Observational studies involve recording changes over time among a specific group of people in their natural settings.
Learn more about clinical trials from this U.S. Food & Drug Administration webpage (https://www.fda.gov/patients/clinical-trials-what-patients-need-know)

Why Participate in Clinical Studies?
People participate in clinical trials for many reasons. People with a disease may participate to receive the newest possible treatment and additional care from clinical study staff as well as to help others living with the same or similar disease. Healthy volunteers may participate to help others and to contribute to moving science forward.

To find the right clinical study we recommend you consult your doctors, other trusted medical professionals, and patient organizations. Additionally, you can use ClinicalTrials.gov to search for clinical studies by disease, terms, or location.

What if There Are No Available Clinical Studies?
ResearchMatch helps connect people interested in research studies (https://www.researchmatch.org/) with researchers from top medical centers across the United States. Anyone from the U.S. can register with this free program funded by NIH. Researchers from participating institutions use the database to search for and invite patients or healthy volunteers who meet their study criteria to participate.

Join the All of Us Research Program!
The All of Us Research Program is inviting 1 million people (https://allofus.nih.gov/) from all backgrounds across the U.S. to help build one of the most diverse health databases in history. Researchers will use the data to learn how our biology, lifestyle, and environment affect health. This may one day help them find ways to treat and prevent diseases.


ClinicalTrials.gov Logo
ClinicalTrials.gov, an affiliate of NIH, provides current information on clinical research studies in the United States and abroad. Talk to a trusted doctor before choosing to participate in any clinical study. We recommend checking this site often and searching for studies with related terms/synonyms to improve results.
Search ClinicalTrials.gov for this disease (https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?cond=bardet-biedl+syndrome&recrs=b&recrs=a)

GARD
Genetic and Rare Diseases
Information Center
Contact a GARD Information Specialist if you need help finding more information on this rare disease or available clinical studies. Please note that GARD cannot enroll individuals in clinical studies.
1-888-205-2311
Available toll-free Monday through Friday from 12 pm to 6 pm Eastern Time
(Except: Federal Holidays (https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/federal-holidays/))

Contact GARD (https://contact.rarediseases.info.nih.gov/Gard/s/?language=en_US)
Use the contact form to send your questions to a GARD Information Specialist.

Please allow 2 to 10 business days for us to respond.


View Sources & References 
GARD collects data from a variety of sources to populate its website and provide accurate and reliable information on rare diseases. 

GARD uses data collected from Orphanet (http://www.orpha.net/) and Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) (https://www.omim.org/) to interpret and provide information on rare diseases. This includes names, synonyms, genes, symptom frequency, population estimates and more.
Orphanet is an online database of rare diseases and orphan drugs that provides aggregated data (http://www.orphadata.org/cgi-bin/index.php) coordinated by INSERM-US14 in Paris.
OMIM is a database of human genes and genetic phenotypes authored and edited at the McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine (https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/genetic-medicine), Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.
GARD uses Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) (https://hpo.jax.org/) for standard terminology to represent a disease's phenotypic and clinical features. 
Download ontology from HPO (https://hpo.jax.org/data/ontology)
Learn more about HPO (https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/49/D1/D1207/6017351)
GARD uses information gathered from the National Center for Biotechnology Information's MedGen (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/medgen/) to help in explaining genetic and rare diseases.
Download MedGen Data and FTP (https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/medgen/)
GARD uses the National Library of Medicine (https://www.nlm.nih.gov/) for a variety of resources on health information.
Learn about the Newborn Screening Coding and Terminology Guide (https://lhncbc.nlm.nih.gov/newbornscreeningcodes/)
Find health information from MedlinePlus (https://medlineplus.gov/)
Learn about the Unified Medical Language System (https://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/index.html)
GARD uses additional resources when developing content. 
Review details of "Improving Diagnosis in Health Care" (https://doi.org/10.17226/21794)
Learn about practices GARD follows when developing easy-to-understand content (https://health.gov/healthliteracyonline/)
