Dengue disease
Other Names: break bone fever; breakbone fever; classic dengue; Dengue; Dengue fever; Dengue virus caused disease or disorder; Dengue virus disease or disorder; Dengue virus infection; Dengue virus infectious disease; DF
https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/diseases/6254/dengue-disease


Disease Information
Summary
Dengue fever (DF), caused by dengue virus, is an arboviral disease characterized by an initial non-specific febrile illness that can sometimes progress to more severe forms manifesting capillary leakage and hemorrhage (dengue hemorrhagic fever, or DHF) and shock (dengue shock syndrome, or DSS).

Resource(s) for Medical Professionals and Scientists on This Disease:
This section is currently in development.


About Dengue disease
Many rare diseases have limited information. Currently, GARD aims to provide the following information for this disease:

Population Estimate: Fewer than 5,000 people in the U.S. have thisdisease.
Symptoms: May start to appear at any time in life.
Cause: This disease is caused by a virus.
Organizations: Patient organizations are available to help find a specialist, or advocacy and support for this specific disease.
Categories: Infectious diseases


Causes
What Causes This Disease?
Viral Infection
This disease is caused by a virus. Viruses are tiny germs that use the living cells of people, plants, animals, or bacteria to multiply. Viruses can be passed from infected insects or animals to people. They can also be passed between people, such as from a pregnant person to their unborn child or from sexual contact. In some cases, you may contract a virus by breathing in particles from the air, coming into contact with infected surfaces, or through contaminated food or water. Learn more about viral infectious diseases from the National Library of Medicine (https://medlineplus.gov/viralinfections.html).

When Do Symptoms of Dengue disease Begin?
Symptoms of this disease may start to appear at any time in life.

The age symptoms may begin to appear differs between diseases. Symptoms may begin in a single age range, or during several age ranges. The symptoms of some diseases may begin at any age. Knowing when symptoms may have appeared can help medical providers find the correct diagnosis.


Symptoms
The types of symptoms experienced, and their intensity, may vary among people with this disease. Your experience may be different from others. Consult your health care team for more information.

The following describes the symptom(s) associated with this disease along with the corresponding body system(s), description, synonyms, and frequency (Note: Not all possible symptoms may be listed):

Medical Term: Abdominal pain
Description: An unpleasant sensation characterized by physical discomfort (such as pricking, throbbing, or aching) and perceived to originate in the abdomen.
Synonyms: Abdominal pain; Pain in stomach; Stomach pain
Frequency: Frequent

Medical Term: Arthralgia
Description: Joint pain.
Synonyms: Arthralgias; Joint pain
Frequency: Frequent

Medical Term: Ascites
Description: Accumulation of fluid in the peritoneal cavity.
Synonyms: Accumulation of fluid in the abdomen
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Bruising susceptibility
Description: An ecchymosis (bruise) refers to the skin discoloration caused by the escape of blood into the tissues from ruptured blood vessels. This term refers to an abnormally increased susceptibility to bruising. The corresponding phenotypic abnormality is generally elicited on medical history as a report of frequent ecchymoses or bruising without adequate trauma.
Synonyms: Bruisability; Bruise easily; Bruising susceptibility; Easy bruisability; Easy bruising
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Cardiorespiratory arrest
Description: This section is currently in development.
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Cerebral hemorrhage
Description: Hemorrhage into the parenchyma of the brain.
Synonyms: Bleeding in brain; Intracerebral hemorrhage
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Diarrhea
Description: Abnormally increased frequency of loose or watery bowel movements.
Synonyms: Diarrhea; Watery stool
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Epistaxis
Description: Epistaxis, or nosebleed, refers to a hemorrhage localized in the nose.
Synonyms: Bloody nose; Frequent nosebleeds; Nasal hemorrhage; Nose bleed; Nose bleeding; Nosebleed
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Gastrointestinal hemorrhage
Description: Hemorrhage affecting the gastrointestinal tract.
Synonyms: Gastrointestinal bleeding; GI hemorrhage
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Gingival bleeding
Description: Hemorrhage affecting the gingiva.
Synonyms: Bleeding gums; Gingival hemorrhage; Gingivorrhagia
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Headache
Description: Cephalgia, or pain sensed in various parts of the head, not confined to the area of distribution of any nerve.
Synonyms: Headache; Headaches
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Hepatomegaly
Description: Abnormally increased size of the liver.
Synonyms: Enlarged liver
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Hypotension
Description: Low Blood Pressure, vascular hypotension.
Synonyms: Arterial hypotension; Low blood pressure
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Lethargy
Description: A state of disinterestedness, listlessness, and indifference, resulting in difficulty performing simple tasks or concentrating.
Synonyms: Lethargy
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Leukopenia
Description: An abnormal decreased number of leukocytes in the blood.
Synonyms:Decreased blood leukocyte number; Low white blood cell count
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Nausea and vomiting
Description: Nausea is a commonly encountered symptom that has been defined as an unpleasant painless subjective feeling that one will imminently vomit. Vomiting has been defined as the forceful expulsion of the contents of the stomach, duodenum, or jejunum through the oral cavity. While nausea and vomiting are often thought to exist on a temporal continuum, this is not always the case. There are situations when severe nausea may be present without emesis and less frequently, when emesis may be present without preceding nausea.
Synonyms: Nausea and vomiting
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Petechiae
Description: Petechiae are pinpoint-sized reddish/purple spots, resembling a rash, that appear just under the skin or a mucous membrane when capillaries have ruptured and some superficial bleeding into the skin has happened. This term refers to an abnormally increased susceptibility to developing petechiae.
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Pruritus
Description: Pruritus is an itch or a sensation that makes a person want to scratch. This term refers to an abnormally increased disposition to experience pruritus.
Synonyms: Itching; Itchy skin; Skin itching
Frequency: Frequent

Medical Term: Skin rash
Description: A red eruption of the skin.
Synonyms: Skin rash
Frequency: Frequent

Medical Term: Thrombocytopenia
Description: A reduction in the number of circulating thrombocytes.
Synonyms: Low platelet count
Frequency: Occasional


Diagnostic Journey
On average, it takes more than six years to receive an accurate rare disease diagnosis. Many primary care providers (PCPs) may not be familiar with rare diseases, and you may need to see multiple specialists to reach the correct diagnosis. However, advocating for yourself with your healthcare team may help speed your time to diagnosis. To combat common challenges, be prepared:
Find disease-specific information to discuss with your healthcare providers.
Ask for diagnostic tests.
Request referrals to specialists.
Knowing where to start your diagnostic journey and how to navigate the next steps are critical to speeding your time to diagnosis.

Your Diagnostic Team
How can a diagnostic team help?
Establishing care with a dedicated primary care provider (PCP) is an important early step in your rare disease journey. A PCP can help improve care and shorten the time to diagnosis by providing referrals to the appropriate specialists. These specialists, with advanced training in different body systems or types of diseases, can offer the specialized diagnostic procedures you need.

Use this tool (https://www.medicare.gov/care-compare/?providerType=Physician) by Medicare to find a PCP in your area by inputting your location and keyword "Primary Care Provider."

A PCP that specializes in the care of children is called a pediatrician. Use this tool (https://www.healthychildren.org/English/tips-tools/find-pediatrician/Pages/Pediatrician-Referral-Service.aspx)  by the American Academy of Pediatrics to find a pediatrician in your area  by inputting your location.

Diagnostic teams for Dengue disease may include:
Infectious disease
Infectious disease specialists focus on diagnosing, treating, and managing diseases caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi, or parasites. Infectious disease specialists may test a sample of blood or the infected tissue to help diagnose the specific infection.

You may be able to find an infectious disease specialist in your area by inputting your location and keyword "Infectious disease" (directory by Medicare) (https://www.medicare.gov/care-compare/?providerType=Physician).


Multidisciplinary Care Centers
Is it time to find a multidisciplinary care center?
If you've visited your PCP, met with specialists, and undergone the recommended tests, but still do not have a confirmed diagnosis, it may be time to visit a multidisciplinary care center. Multidisciplinary care centers are usually teaching, university, or research hospitals that have teams of medical experts and specialists working together in the same location. This means a wide range of diagnostic tests and clinical knowledge are available at one facility, which can help increase communication and collaboration among your care team. The additional resources often available at multidisciplinary centers may help speed the time to diagnosis for rare diseases.
Find a multidisciplinary care center in your area (https://www.medicare.gov/care-compare/?providerType=Hospital).

Rare Disease Experts
How can you find a rare disease expert?
If a diagnosis remains unknown despite extensive efforts by your PCP and specialists, it can be challenging to know what kind of expert you may need or where to find one. A rare disease expert is a care provider that has knowledge or training on specific disease(s), but there may only be a few experts in your state, region, or country. Rare disease experts may work at large research or teaching hospitals. In complex cases, coordinating with a network of experts can help your care provider find the right diagnosis. 
Contact a GARD Information Specialist for help finding an expert (https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/contact).

You can ask your care providers for help finding an expert or use directory tools to search for experts near you. The National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) maintains a list of rare disease centers with experts that work together to find treatments and cures for a broad range of rare diseases. Search NORD's Center Directory to find experts near you (https://rarediseases.org/rare-disease-centers-of-excellence/). 

Find Your Community
How Can Patient Organizations Help?
Patient organizations can help patients and families connect. They build public awareness of the disease and are a driving force behind research to improve patients' lives. They may offer online and in-person resources to help people live well with their disease. Many collaborate with medical experts and researchers.

Services of patient organizations differ, but may include:
Ways to connect to others and share personal stories
Easy-to-read information
Up-to-date treatment and research information
Patient registries
Lists of specialists or specialty centers
Financial aid and travel resources

Please note: GARD provides organizations for informational purposes only and not as an endorsement of their services. Please contact an organization directly if you have questions about the information or resources it provides.

View GARD's criteria for including patient organizations, which can be found under the FAQs on our About page (https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/about). Request an update or to have your organization added to GARD (https://contact.rarediseases.info.nih.gov/Gard/s/patient-organization?language=en_US).

Patient Organizations

Organization Name: Break Dengue (https://www.breakdengue.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Dengue disease
Country: United Kingdom

Organization Name: EveryLife Foundation for Rare Diseases (https://everylifefoundation.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Rare Diseases
Country: United States

Organization Name: Genetic Alliance (http://www.geneticalliance.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Rare Diseases
Country: United States

Organization Name: Global Genes (http://globalgenes.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Rare Diseases
Country: United States

Organization Name: National Organization for Rare Disorders (https://rarediseases.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Rare Diseases
Country: United States

Participate in Research
Clinical studies are part of clinical research and play an important role in medical advances, including for rare diseases. Through clinical studies, researchers may ultimately uncover better ways to treat, prevent, diagnose, and understand human diseases.

What Are Clinical Studies?
Clinical studies are medical research involving people as participants. There are two main types of clinical studies:
Clinical trials determine if a new test or treatment for a disease is effective and safe by comparing groups receiving different tests/treatments.
Observational studies involve recording changes over time among a specific group of people in their natural settings.
Learn more about clinical trials from this U.S. Food & Drug Administration webpage (https://www.fda.gov/patients/clinical-trials-what-patients-need-know)

Why Participate in Clinical Studies?
People participate in clinical trials for many reasons. People with a disease may participate to receive the newest possible treatment and additional care from clinical study staff as well as to help others living with the same or similar disease. Healthy volunteers may participate to help others and to contribute to moving science forward.

To find the right clinical study we recommend you consult your doctors, other trusted medical professionals, and patient organizations. Additionally, you can use ClinicalTrials.gov to search for clinical studies by disease, terms, or location.

What if There Are No Available Clinical Studies?
ResearchMatch helps connect people interested in research studies (https://www.researchmatch.org/) with researchers from top medical centers across the United States. Anyone from the U.S. can register with this free program funded by NIH. Researchers from participating institutions use the database to search for and invite patients or healthy volunteers who meet their study criteria to participate.

Join the All of Us Research Program!
The All of Us Research Program is inviting 1 million people (https://allofus.nih.gov/) from all backgrounds across the U.S. to help build one of the most diverse health databases in history. Researchers will use the data to learn how our biology, lifestyle, and environment affect health. This may one day help them find ways to treat and prevent diseases.


ClinicalTrials.gov Logo
ClinicalTrials.gov, an affiliate of NIH, provides current information on clinical research studies in the United States and abroad. Talk to a trusted doctor before choosing to participate in any clinical study. We recommend checking this site often and searching for studies with related terms/synonyms to improve results.
Search ClinicalTrials.gov for this disease (https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?cond=dengue+disease&recrs=b&recrs=a)

GARD
Genetic and Rare Diseases
Information Center
Contact a GARD Information Specialist if you need help finding more information on this rare disease or available clinical studies. Please note that GARD cannot enroll individuals in clinical studies.
1-888-205-2311
Available toll-free Monday through Friday from 12 pm to 6 pm Eastern Time
(Except: Federal Holidays (https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/federal-holidays/))

Contact GARD (https://contact.rarediseases.info.nih.gov/Gard/s/?language=en_US)
Use the contact form to send your questions to a GARD Information Specialist.

Please allow 2 to 10 business days for us to respond.


View Sources & References 
GARD collects data from a variety of sources to populate its website and provide accurate and reliable information on rare diseases. 

GARD uses data collected from Orphanet (http://www.orpha.net/) and Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) (https://www.omim.org/) to interpret and provide information on rare diseases. This includes names, synonyms, genes, symptom frequency, population estimates and more.
Orphanet is an online database of rare diseases and orphan drugs that provides aggregated data (http://www.orphadata.org/cgi-bin/index.php) coordinated by INSERM-US14 in Paris.
OMIM is a database of human genes and genetic phenotypes authored and edited at the McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine (https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/genetic-medicine), Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.
GARD uses Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) (https://hpo.jax.org/) for standard terminology to represent a disease's phenotypic and clinical features. 
Download ontology from HPO (https://hpo.jax.org/data/ontology)
Learn more about HPO (https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/49/D1/D1207/6017351)
GARD uses information gathered from the National Center for Biotechnology Information's MedGen (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/medgen/) to help in explaining genetic and rare diseases.
Download MedGen Data and FTP (https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/medgen/)
GARD uses the National Library of Medicine (https://www.nlm.nih.gov/) for a variety of resources on health information.
Learn about the Newborn Screening Coding and Terminology Guide (https://lhncbc.nlm.nih.gov/newbornscreeningcodes/)
Find health information from MedlinePlus (https://medlineplus.gov/)
Learn about the Unified Medical Language System (https://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/index.html)
GARD uses additional resources when developing content. 
Review details of "Improving Diagnosis in Health Care" (https://doi.org/10.17226/21794)
Learn about practices GARD follows when developing easy-to-understand content (https://health.gov/healthliteracyonline/)

