Muckle-wells syndrome
Other Names: neutrophilic urticaria
https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/diseases/8472/muckle-wells-syndrome

Disease Information
Summary
Muckle-Wells syndrome (MWS) is an intermediate form of cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome (CAPS; see this term) and is characterized by recurrent fever (with malaise and chills), recurrent urticaria-like skin rash, sensorineural deafness, general signs of inflammation (eye redness, headaches, arthralgia/myalgia) and potentially life-threatening secondary amyloidosis (AA type).

Resource(s) for Medical Professionals and Scientists on This Disease:
RARe-SOURCE™ (https://raresource.nih.gov/diseases/filter/0008472) offers rare disease gene variant annotations and links to rare disease gene literature.

About Muckle-wells syndrome
Many rare diseases have limited information. Currently, GARD aims to provide the following information for this disease:

Population Estimate: This section is currently in development.
Symptoms: May start to appear from Birth to Childhood.
Cause: This disease is caused by a change in the genetic material (DNA).
Organizations:Patient organizations are available to help find a specialist, or advocacy and support for this specific disease.
Categories: Genetic diseases  Kidney diseases  Skin diseases

Causes
What Causes This Disease?
Muckle-wells syndrome is caused by genetic mutations, also known as pathogenic variants. Genetic mutations can be hereditary, when parents pass them down to their children, or they may occur randomly when cells are dividing. Genetic mutations may also result from contracted viruses, environmental factors, such as UV radiation from sunlight exposure, or a combination of any of these. Learn more about genetic diseases from the National Library of Medicine (NLM) (https://medlineplus.gov/geneticdisorders.html).

If you suspect you may have this disease, you may want to start collecting your family health history. Information such as other family members who have had similar symptoms, when their/your symptoms first appeared, or exposures to any potential disease-causing environmental factors should be discussed with your medical team. This tool from the Surgeon General can help you collect your family health history (https://www.cdc.gov/family-health-history/about/index.html).

Known Genetic Mutations
Muckle-wells syndrome is caused by genetic mutations in the following known gene(s):
NLRP3
Learn more about these genes by searching them on the National Library of Medicine (NLM) (https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/gene/).

Given these known genetic mutation(s), you may want to ask your health care team if genetic testing is right for you. Genetic tests are laboratory tests that use samples of blood, saliva, or other tissues to help identify changes in genes, chromosomes, or proteins. Genetic testing can help confirm or rule out a suspected genetic disease, or can provide other useful information to your health care team. Learn more about genetic testing from the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) (https://www.genome.gov/FAQ/Genetic-Testing).

Can This Disease Be Passed Down From Parent to Child?
Yes. It is possible for a biological parent to pass down genetic mutations that cause or increase the chances of getting this disease to their child. This is known as inheritance. Knowing whether other family members have previously had this disease, also known as family health history, can be very important information for your medical team. This tool from the Surgeon General can help you collect your family health history (https://www.cdc.gov/family-health-history/about/index.html).

There are multiple ways, or patterns, a disease can be inherited depending on the gene(s) involved. Based on GARD's current data, this disease can be inherited in the following pattern(s):

Autosomal Dominant
Autosomal means the gene involved is located on one of the numbered chromosomes. Dominant means that a child only needs to inherit one copy of the mutated gene, from either biological parent, to be affected by the disease.

People affected by an autosomal dominant disease have a 50% chance of passing on the mutated gene to their biological child.

Learn more about inheritance patterns from the National Library of Medicine (NLM) (https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/understanding/inheritance/inheritancepatterns/).


When Do Symptoms of Muckle-wells syndrome Begin?
Symptoms of this disease may start to appear from Birth to Childhood.

The age symptoms may begin to appear differs between diseases. Symptoms may begin in a single age range, or during several age ranges. The symptoms of some diseases may begin at any age. Knowing when symptoms may have appeared can help medical providers find the correct diagnosis.


Symptoms
The types of symptoms experienced, and their intensity, may vary among people with this disease. Your experience may be different from others. Consult your health care team for more information.

The following describes the symptom(s) associated with this disease along with the corresponding body system(s), description, synonyms, and frequency (Note: Not all possible symptoms may be listed):

Medical Term: Abdominal pain
Description: An unpleasant sensation characterized by physical discomfort (such as pricking, throbbing, or aching) and perceived to originate in the abdomen.
Synonyms: Abdominal pain; Pain in stomach; Stomach pain
Frequency: Frequent

Medical Term: Abnormal palate morphology
Description: Any abnormality of the palate, i.e., of roof of the mouth.
Synonyms:Abnormality of the roof of the mouth; Palatal anomaly; Palate abnormality; Abnormality of the palate
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Abnormality of the genital system
Description: An abnormality of the genital system.
Synonyms: Genital abnormalities; Genital abnormality; Genital anomalies; Genital defects
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Abnormality of the nose
Description: An abnormality of the nose.
Synonyms: Abnormality of the nose; Anomaly of the nose; Nasal abnormality; Nasal anomaly
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Abnormality of the voice
Synonyms: Abnormality of the voice; Voice abnormality
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Anemia
Description: A reduction in erythrocytes volume or hemoglobin concentration.
Synonyms: Anaemia; Low number of red blood cells or hemoglobin
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Arthralgia
Description: Joint pain.
Synonyms: Arthralgias; Joint pain
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Arthritis
Description: Inflammation of a joint.
Synonyms: Arthritis; Joint inflammation
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Broad foot
Description: A foot for which the measured width is above the 95th centile for age; or, a foot that appears disproportionately wide for its length.
Synonyms: Broad feet; Broad foot; Wide foot
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Camptodactyly of finger
Description: The distal interphalangeal joint and/or the proximal interphalangeal joint of the fingers cannot be extended to 180 degrees by either active or passive extension.
Synonyms: Camptodactyly of hands; Camptodactyly of proximal interphalangeal joint; Contractures of the proximal interphalangeal joints of the fingers; Flexion contractures of proximal interphalangeal joints; Permanent flexion of the finger; Proximal interphalangeal finger joint contractures
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Conjunctivitis
Description: Inflammation of the conjunctiva.
Synonyms: Pink eye
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Cranial nerve paralysis
Synonyms: Cranial nerve palsies; Cranial nerve palsy; Cranial nerve paresis
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Delayed puberty
Description: Passing the age when puberty normally occurs with no physical or hormonal signs of the onset of puberty.
Synonyms: Delayed pubertal development; Delayed pubertal growth; Delayed puberty; Pubertal delay
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Episcleritis
Description: Inflammation of the episclera, a thin layer of tissue covering the white part (sclera) of the eye
Synonyms: Inflammation of the thin layer on top of the white part of eye
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Glaucoma
Description: Glaucoma refers loss of retinal ganglion cells in a characteristic pattern of optic neuropathy usually associated with increased intraocular pressure.
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Hepatomegaly
Description: Abnormally increased size of the liver.
Synonyms: Enlarged liver
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Hernia of the abdominal wall
Description: The presence of a hernia in the abdominal wall.
Synonyms:Herniated abdominal wall
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Ichthyosis
Description: An abnormality of the skin characterized the presence of excessive amounts of dry surface scales on the skin resulting from an abnormality of keratinization.
Synonyms: Ichthyosiform abnormality of the skin; Ichthyotic skin
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Macrocephaly
Description: Occipitofrontal (head) circumference greater than 97th centile compared to appropriate, age matched, sex-matched normal standards. Alternatively, a apparently increased size of the cranium.
Synonyms: Increased size of cranium; Increased size of skull; Large head; Large head circumference; Macrocrania; Megacephaly
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Myalgia
Description: Pain in muscle.
Synonyms: Muscle ache; Muscle pain
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Nephropathy
Description: A nonspecific term referring to disease or damage of the kidneys.
Frequency: Frequent

Medical Term: Nephrotic syndrome
Description: Nephrotic syndrome is a collection of findings resulting from glomerular dysfunction with an increase in glomerular capillary wall permeability associated with pronounced proteinuria. Nephrotic syndrome refers to the constellation of clinical findings that result from severe renal loss of protein, with Proteinuria and hypoalbuminemia, edema, and hyperlipidemia.
Synonyms: Nephrosis
Frequency: Frequent

Medical Term: Optic atrophy
Description: Atrophy of the optic nerve. Optic atrophy results from the death of the retinal ganglion cell axons that comprise the optic nerve and manifesting as a pale optic nerve on fundoscopy.
Synonyms:Optic nerve atrophy; Optic-nerve degeneration
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Pes cavus
Description: The presence of an unusually high plantar arch. Also called high instep, pes cavus refers to a distinctly hollow form of the sole of the foot when it is bearing weight.
Synonyms: High-arched foot
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Progressive sensorineural hearing impairment
Description: A progressive form of sensorineural hearing impairment.
Synonyms: Bilateral progressive sensorineural hearing loss; Hearing loss, progressive sensorineural; Hearing loss, sensorineural, bilateral, progressive; Hearing loss, sensorineural, progressive; Progressive bilateral sensorineural hearing loss; Sensorineural hearing loss, progressive
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Recurrent aphthous stomatitis
Description: Recurrent episodes of ulceration of the oral mucosa, typically presenting as painful, sharply circumscribed fibrin-covered mucosal defects with a hyperemic border.
Synonyms: Recurrent canker sores; Recurrent oral aphthae
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Short stature
Description: A height below that which is expected according to age and gender norms. Although there is no universally accepted definition of short stature, many refer to "short stature" as height more than 2 standard deviations below the mean for age and gender (or below the 3rd percentile for age and gender dependent norms).
Synonyms:Decreased body height; Height less than 3rd percentile; Short stature; Small stature; Stature below 3rd percentile
Frequency: Occasional

Medical Term: Skin rash
Description: A red eruption of the skin.
Synonyms: Skin rash
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Splenomegaly
Description: Abnormal increased size of the spleen.
Synonyms: Increased spleen size
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Urticaria
Description: Raised, well-circumscribed areas of erythema and edema involving the dermis and epidermis. Urticaria is intensely pruritic, and blanches completely with pressure.
Synonyms: Hives
Frequency: Frequent

Medical Term: Uveitis
Description: Inflammation of one or all portions of the uveal tract.
Frequency: Very frequent

Medical Term: Vasculitis
Description: Inflammation of blood vessel.
Synonyms: Angiitis; Inflammation of blood vessel
Frequency: Occasional


Diagnostic Journey
On average, it takes more than six years to receive an accurate rare disease diagnosis. Many primary care providers (PCPs) may not be familiar with rare diseases, and you may need to see multiple specialists to reach the correct diagnosis. However, advocating for yourself with your healthcare team may help speed your time to diagnosis. To combat common challenges, be prepared:
Find disease-specific information to discuss with your healthcare providers.
Ask for diagnostic tests.
Request referrals to specialists.
Knowing where to start your diagnostic journey and how to navigate the next steps are critical to speeding your time to diagnosis.

Your Diagnostic Team
How can a diagnostic team help?
Establishing care with a dedicated primary care provider (PCP) is an important early step in your rare disease journey. A PCP can help improve care and shorten the time to diagnosis by providing referrals to the appropriate specialists. These specialists, with advanced training in different body systems or types of diseases, can offer the specialized diagnostic procedures you need.

Use this tool (https://www.medicare.gov/care-compare/?providerType=Physician) by Medicare to find a PCP in your area by inputting your location and keyword "Primary Care Provider."

A PCP that specializes in the care of children is called a pediatrician. Use this tool (https://www.healthychildren.org/English/tips-tools/find-pediatrician/Pages/Pediatrician-Referral-Service.aspx)  by the American Academy of Pediatrics to find a pediatrician in your area  by inputting your location.

Diagnostic teams for Muckle-wells syndrome may include:
Dermatology
Dermatology specialists focus on diagnosing, treating, and managing diseases that affect the skin, hair, and nails. Dermatologists may use clinical examination of the skin or skin biopsy to diagnose a condition.

You may be able to find a dermatologist  in your area (directory by the American Academy of Dermatology Association) (https://find-a-derm.aad.org/).

Genetics
Genetic specialists focus on diagnosing, treating, and managing patients with genetic changes that affect a person’s health. Specialists known as genetic counselors and geneticists commonly interview patients about family history and discuss genetic risks to diagnose genetic conditions. They may also use genetic testing to determine a diagnosis. Genetic counselors often specialize in certain types of genetic diseases like cancer, or different life stages like prenatal or pediatric genetic counseling.

You may be able to find a genetic specialist  in your area (directory by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics)(https://clinics.acmg.net/).

Immunology
Immunology specialists focus on diagnosing, treating, and managing diseases that affect the immune system. Allergists and immunologists specialize in this kind of medicine. They often use blood tests and skin tests to diagnose the cause of an immune response.

You may be able to find an allergist or immunologist  in your area (directory by the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology)(https://allergist.aaaai.org/find/).

Nephrology
Nephrology specialists focus on diagnosing, treating, and managing diseases that affect the kidneys. Nephrologists may order blood tests, urine tests, and imaging studies to diagnose diseases of the kidneys.

You may be able to find a nephrologist in your area by inputting your location and keyword "Nephrology" (directory by Medicare) (https://www.medicare.gov/care-compare/?providerType=Physician).

Rheumatology
Rheumatology specialists focus on diagnosing, treating, and managing diseases and inflammation caused by the body’s immune system not working properly. Rheumatologists can diagnose autoimmune and autoinflammatory diseases. Rheumatologists commonly use biopsies, blood tests, heart and muscle function tests, and a variety of imaging tests to aide in diagnosis. 

You may be able to find a rheumatologist  (directory by the American College of Rheumatology)(https://my.rheumatology.org/find-a-rheumatologist).

Multidisciplinary Care Centers
Is it time to find a multidisciplinary care center?
If you've visited your PCP, met with specialists, and undergone the recommended tests, but still do not have a confirmed diagnosis, it may be time to visit a multidisciplinary care center. Multidisciplinary care centers are usually teaching, university, or research hospitals that have teams of medical experts and specialists working together in the same location. This means a wide range of diagnostic tests and clinical knowledge are available at one facility, which can help increase communication and collaboration among your care team. The additional resources often available at multidisciplinary centers may help speed the time to diagnosis for rare diseases.
Find a multidisciplinary care center in your area (https://www.medicare.gov/care-compare/?providerType=Hospital).

Rare Disease Experts
How can you find a rare disease expert?
If a diagnosis remains unknown despite extensive efforts by your PCP and specialists, it can be challenging to know what kind of expert you may need or where to find one. A rare disease expert is a care provider that has knowledge or training on specific disease(s), but there may only be a few experts in your state, region, or country. Rare disease experts may work at large research or teaching hospitals. In complex cases, coordinating with a network of experts can help your care provider find the right diagnosis. 
Contact a GARD Information Specialist for help finding an expert (https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/contact).

You can ask your care providers for help finding an expert or use directory tools to search for experts near you. The National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) maintains a list of rare disease centers with experts that work together to find treatments and cures for a broad range of rare diseases. Search NORD's Center Directory to find experts near you (https://rarediseases.org/rare-disease-centers-of-excellence/). 

Find Your Community
How Can Patient Organizations Help?
Patient organizations can help patients and families connect. They build public awareness of the disease and are a driving force behind research to improve patients' lives. They may offer online and in-person resources to help people live well with their disease. Many collaborate with medical experts and researchers.

Services of patient organizations differ, but may include:
Ways to connect to others and share personal stories
Easy-to-read information
Up-to-date treatment and research information
Patient registries
Lists of specialists or specialty centers
Financial aid and travel resources

Please note: GARD provides organizations for informational purposes only and not as an endorsement of their services. Please contact an organization directly if you have questions about the information or resources it provides.

View GARD's criteria for including patient organizations, which can be found under the FAQs on our About page (https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/about). Request an update or to have your organization added to GARD (https://contact.rarediseases.info.nih.gov/Gard/s/patient-organization?language=en_US).

Patient Organizations

Organization Name: FMF ESPAÑA (https://www.fmfspain.com/)
Who They Serve: People With Muckle-wells syndrome
Helpful Link: List of Experts (https://www.fmfspain.com/centros-y-medicos-de-referencia-para-adultos-con-sindromes-autoinflamatorios-en-espana/)
Country: Spain

Organization Name: Immunodeficiency UK (https://www.immunodeficiencyuk.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Muckle-wells syndrome
Country: United Kingdom

Organization Name: Rare Autoinflammatory Conditions Community - UK (https://www.raccuk.com/)
Who They Serve: People With Muckle-wells syndrome
Helpful Link: List of Experts (https://raccuk.com/autoinflammatory-uk-hospitals/)
Helpful Link: Research Registry (https://raccuk.com/uk-autoinflammatory-patient-registry/)
Country: United Kingdom

Organization Name: The International Foundation for Autoimmune & Autoinflammatory Arthritis (https://www.aiarthritis.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Muckle-wells syndrome
Country: United States

Organization Name: Children's Skin Disease Foundation (https://www.csdf.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Skin diseases
Country: United States

Organization Name: National Kidney Foundation (https://www.kidney.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Kidney diseases 
Helpful Link: Research Registry (https://www.kidney.org/nkfpatientnetwork)
Country: United States

Organization Name: Renal Support Network (https://www.rsnhope.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Kidney diseases
Country: United States

Organization Name: EveryLife Foundation for Rare Diseases (https://everylifefoundation.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Rare Diseases
Country: United States

Organization Name: Genetic Alliance (http://www.geneticalliance.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Rare Diseases
Country: United States

Organization Name: Global Genes (http://globalgenes.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Rare Diseases
Country: United States

Organization Name: National Organization for Rare Disorders (https://rarediseases.org/)
Who They Serve: People With Rare Diseases
Country: United States

Participate in Research
Clinical studies are part of clinical research and play an important role in medical advances, including for rare diseases. Through clinical studies, researchers may ultimately uncover better ways to treat, prevent, diagnose, and understand human diseases.

What Are Clinical Studies?
Clinical studies are medical research involving people as participants. There are two main types of clinical studies:
Clinical trials determine if a new test or treatment for a disease is effective and safe by comparing groups receiving different tests/treatments.
Observational studies involve recording changes over time among a specific group of people in their natural settings.
Learn more about clinical trials from this U.S. Food & Drug Administration webpage (https://www.fda.gov/patients/clinical-trials-what-patients-need-know)

Why Participate in Clinical Studies?
People participate in clinical trials for many reasons. People with a disease may participate to receive the newest possible treatment and additional care from clinical study staff as well as to help others living with the same or similar disease. Healthy volunteers may participate to help others and to contribute to moving science forward.

To find the right clinical study we recommend you consult your doctors, other trusted medical professionals, and patient organizations. Additionally, you can use ClinicalTrials.gov to search for clinical studies by disease, terms, or location.

What if There Are No Available Clinical Studies?
ResearchMatch helps connect people interested in research studies (https://www.researchmatch.org/) with researchers from top medical centers across the United States. Anyone from the U.S. can register with this free program funded by NIH. Researchers from participating institutions use the database to search for and invite patients or healthy volunteers who meet their study criteria to participate.

Join the All of Us Research Program!
The All of Us Research Program is inviting 1 million people (https://allofus.nih.gov/) from all backgrounds across the U.S. to help build one of the most diverse health databases in history. Researchers will use the data to learn how our biology, lifestyle, and environment affect health. This may one day help them find ways to treat and prevent diseases.


ClinicalTrials.gov Logo
ClinicalTrials.gov, an affiliate of NIH, provides current information on clinical research studies in the United States and abroad. Talk to a trusted doctor before choosing to participate in any clinical study. We recommend checking this site often and searching for studies with related terms/synonyms to improve results.
Search ClinicalTrials.gov for this disease (https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?cond=muckle-wells+syndrome&recrs=b&recrs=a).

GARD
Genetic and Rare Diseases
Information Center
Contact a GARD Information Specialist if you need help finding more information on this rare disease or available clinical studies. Please note that GARD cannot enroll individuals in clinical studies.
1-888-205-2311
Available toll-free Monday through Friday from 12 pm to 6 pm Eastern Time
(Except: Federal Holidays (https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/federal-holidays/))

Contact GARD (https://contact.rarediseases.info.nih.gov/Gard/s/?language=en_US)
Use the contact form to send your questions to a GARD Information Specialist.

Please allow 2 to 10 business days for us to respond.


View Sources & References 
GARD collects data from a variety of sources to populate its website and provide accurate and reliable information on rare diseases. 

GARD uses data collected from Orphanet (http://www.orpha.net/) and Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) (https://www.omim.org/) to interpret and provide information on rare diseases. This includes names, synonyms, genes, symptom frequency, population estimates and more.
Orphanet is an online database of rare diseases and orphan drugs that provides aggregated data (http://www.orphadata.org/cgi-bin/index.php) coordinated by INSERM-US14 in Paris.
OMIM is a database of human genes and genetic phenotypes authored and edited at the McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine (https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/genetic-medicine), Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.
GARD uses Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) (https://hpo.jax.org/) for standard terminology to represent a disease's phenotypic and clinical features. 
Download ontology from HPO (https://hpo.jax.org/data/ontology)
Learn more about HPO (https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/49/D1/D1207/6017351)
GARD uses information gathered from the National Center for Biotechnology Information's MedGen (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/medgen/) to help in explaining genetic and rare diseases.
Download MedGen Data and FTP (https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/medgen/)
GARD uses the National Library of Medicine (https://www.nlm.nih.gov/) for a variety of resources on health information.
Learn about the Newborn Screening Coding and Terminology Guide (https://lhncbc.nlm.nih.gov/newbornscreeningcodes/)
Find health information from MedlinePlus (https://medlineplus.gov/)
Learn about the Unified Medical Language System (https://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/index.html)
GARD uses additional resources when developing content. 
Review details of "Improving Diagnosis in Health Care" (https://doi.org/10.17226/21794)
Learn about practices GARD follows when developing easy-to-understand content (https://health.gov/healthliteracyonline/)
